The Project Gutenberg eBook of The highest aim of the physicist, by
Henry A. Rowland

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States, you
will have to check the laws of the country where you are located before
using this eBook.

Title: The highest aim of the physicist

Author: Henry A. Rowland

Release Date: May 18, 2023 [eBook #70791]

Language: English

Produced by: Laura Natal Rodrigues (Images generously made available by
             JSTOR Digital Library.)

*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE HIGHEST AIM OF THE
PHYSICIST ***


THE HIGHEST AIM OF THE PHYSICIST[1]




PROFESSOR HENRY A. ROWLAND




SCIENCE


EDITORIAL COMMITTEE: S. NEWCOMB, Mathematics; R. S. WOODWARD, Mechanics;
E. C. PICKERING, Astronomy; T. C. MENDENHALL, Physics; R. H. THURSTON,
Engineering; IRA REMSEN, Chemistry; J. LE CONTE, Geology; W. M. DAVIS,
Physiography; HENRY F. OSBORN, Paleontology; W. K. BROOKS, C. HART MERRIAM,
Zoology; S. H. SCUDDER, Entomology; C. E. BESSEY, N. L. BRITTON, Botany;
C. S. MINOT, Embryology, Histology; H. P. BOWDITCH, Physiology; J. S.
BILLINGS, Hygiene; J. MCKEEN CATTELL, Psychology; J. W. POWELL,
Anthropology.


AMERICAN ASSOCIATION FOR THE ADVANCEMENT OF SCIENCE

FRIDAY, DECEMBER 8, 1899





GENTLEMEN AND FELLOW PHYSICISTS OF AMERICA: We meet to day on an
occasion which marks an epoch in the history of physics in America; may
the future show that it also marks an epoch in the history of the
science which this Society is organized to cultivate! For we meet here
in the interest of a science which above all sciences deals with the
foundation of the Universe, with the constitution of matter from which
everything in the Universe is made and with the ether of space by which
alone the various portions of matter forming the Universe affect each
other even at such distances as we may never expect to traverse,
whatever the progress of our science in the future.

We, who have devoted our lives to the solution of problems connected
with physics, now meet together to help each other and to forward the
interests of the subject which we love. A subject which appeals most
strongly to the better instincts of our nature and the problems of which
tax our minds to the limit of their capacity and suggest the grandest
and noblest ideas of which they are capable.

In a country where the doctrine of the equal rights of man has been
distorted to mean the equality of man in other respects, we form a small
and unique body of men, a new variety of the human race as one of our
greatest scientists calls it, whose views of what constitutes the
greatest achievement in life are very different from those around us. In
this respect we form an aristocracy, not of wealth, not of pedigree, but
of intellect and of ideals, holding him in the highest respect who adds
the most to our knowledge or who strives after it as the highest good.

Thus we meet together for mutual sympathy and the interchange of
knowledge, and may we do so ever with appreciation of the benefits to
ourselves and possibly to our science. Above all, let us cultivate the
idea of the dignity of our pursuit so that this feeling may sustain us
in the midst of a world which gives its highest praise, not to the
investigation in the pure etherial physics which our Society is formed
to cultivate, but to one who uses it for satisfying the physical rather
than the intellectual needs of mankind. He who makes two blades of grass
grow where one grew before is the benefactor of mankind; but he who
obscurely worked to find the laws of such growth is the intellectual
superior as well as the greater benefactor of the two.

How stands our country, then, in this respect? My answer must still be,
now, as it was fifteen years ago, that much of the intellect of the
country is still wasted in the pursuit of so-called practical science
which ministers to our physical needs and but little thought and money
is given to the grander portion of the subject which appeals to our
intellect alone. But your presence here gives evidence that such a
condition is not to last forever.

Even in the past we have a few names whom scientists throughout the
world delight to honor. Franklin, who almost revolutionized the science
of electricity by a few simple but profound experiments. Count Rumford,
whose experiments almost demonstrated the nature of heat. Henry, who
might have done much for the progress of physics had he published more
fully the results of his investigations. Mayer, whose simple and
ingenious experiments have been a source of pleasure and profit to many.
This is the meager list of those whom death allows me to speak of and
who have earned mention here by doing something for the progress of our
science. And yet the record has been searched for more than a hundred
years. How different had I started to record those who have made useful
and beneficial inventions!

But I know, when I look in the faces of those before me, where the eager
intellect and high purpose sit enthroned on bodies possessing the vigor
and strength of youth, that the writer of a hundred years hence can no
longer throw such a reproach upon our country. Nor can we blame those
who have gone before us. The progress of every science shows us the
condition of its growth. Very few persons, if isolated in a
semi-civilized land, have either the desire or the opportunity of
pursuing the higher branches of science. Even if they should be able to
do so, their influence on their science depends upon what they publish
and make known to the world. A hermit philosopher we can imagine might
make many useful discoveries. Yet, if he keeps them to himself, he can
never claim to have benefited the world in any degree. His unpublished
results are his private gain, but the world is no better off until he
has made them known in language strong enough to call attention to them
and to convince the world of their truth. Thus, to encourage the growth
of any science, the best thing we can do is to meet together in its
interest, to discuss its problems, to criticize each other's work and,
best of all, to provide means by which the better portion of it may be
made known to the world. Furthermore, let us encourage discrimination in
our thoughts and work. Let us recognize the eras when great thoughts
have been introduced into our subject and let us honor the great men who
introduced and proved them correct. Let us forever reject such foolish
ideas as the equality of mankind and carefully give the greater credit
to the greater man. So, in choosing the subjects for our investigation,
let us, if possible, work upon those subjects which will finally give us
an advanced knowledge of some great subject. I am aware that we cannot
always do this; our ideas will often flow in side channels; but, with
the great problems of the Universe before us, we may sometime be able to
do our share toward the greater end.

What is matter; what is gravitation; what is ether and the radiation
through it; what is electricity and magnetism; how are these connected
together and what is their relation to heat? These are the greater
problems of the universe. But many infinitely smaller problems we must
attack and solve before we can even guess at the solution of the greater
ones.

In our attitude toward these greater problems how do we stand and what
is the foundation of our knowledge?

Newton and the great array of astronomers who have succeeded him have
proved that, within planetary distances, matter attracts all others with
a force varying inversely as the square of the distance. But what sort
of proof have we of this law? It is derived from astronomical
observations on the planetary orbits. It agrees very well within these
immense spaces; but where is the evidence that the law holds for smaller
distances? We measure the lunar distance and the size of the earth and
compare the force at that distance with the force of gravitation on the
earth's surface. But to do this we must compare the matter in the earth
with that in the sun. This we can only do by _assuming_ the law to be
proved. Again, in descending from the earth's gravitation to that of two
small bodies, as in the Cavendish experiment, we _assume_ the law to
hold and deduce the mass of the earth in terms of our unit of mass.
Hence, when we say that the mass of the earth is 5½ times that of an
equal volume of water we _assume_ the law of gravitation to be that of
Newton. Thus a proof of the law from planetary down to terrestrial
distances is physically impossible.

Again, that portion of the law which says that gravitational attraction
is proportional to the quantity of matter, which is the same as saying
that the attraction of one body by another is not affected by the
presence of a third, the feeble proof that we give by weighing bodies in
a balance in different positions with respect to each other cannot be
accepted on a larger scale. When we can tear the sun into two portions
and prove that either of the two halves attracts half as much as the
whole, then we shall have a proof worth mentioning.

Then as to the relation of gravitation and time what can we say? Can we
for a moment suppose that two bodies moving through space with great
velocities have their gravitation unaltered? I think not. Neither can we
accept Laplace's proof that the force of gravitation acts
instantaneously through space, for we can readily imagine some
compensating features unthought of by Laplace.

How little we know then of this law which has been under observation for
two hundred years!

Then as to matter itself how have our views changed and how are they
constantly changing. The round hard atom of Newton which God alone could
break into pieces has become a molecule composed of many atoms, and each
of these smaller atoms has become so elastic that after vibrating
100,000 times its amplitude of vibration is scarcely diminished. It has
become so complicated that it can vibrate with as many thousand notes.
We cover the atom with patches of electricity here and there and make of
it a system compared with which the planetary system, nay the universe
itself, is simplicity. Nay more: some of us even claim the power, which
Newton attributed to God alone, of breaking the atom into smaller pieces
whose size is left to the imagination. Where, then, is that person who
ignorantly sneers at the study of matter as a material and gross study?
Where, again, is that man with gifts so God-like and mind so elevated
that he can attack and solve its problem?

To all matter we attribute two properties, gravitation and inertia.
Without these two matter cannot exist. The greatest of the natural laws
states that the power of gravitational attraction is proportional to the
mass of the body. This law of Newton, almost neglected in the thoughts
of physicists, undoubtedly has vast import of the very deepest meaning.
Shall it mean that all matter is finally constructed of uniform and
similar primordial atoms or can we find some other explanation?

That the molecules of matter are not round, we know from the facts of
crystallography and the action of matter in rotating the plane of
polarization of light.

That portions of the molecules and even of the atoms are electrically
charged, we know from electrolysis, the action of gases in a vacuum tube
and from the Zeeman effect.

That some of them act like little magnets, we know from the magnetic
action of iron, nickel and cobalt.

That they are elastic, the spectrum shows, and that the vibrating
portion carries the electrified charge with it is shown by the Zeeman
effect.

Here, then, we have made quite a start in our problem: but how far are
we from the complete solution? How can we imagine the material of which
ordinary or primordial atoms are made, dealing as we do only with
aggregation of atoms alone? Forever beyond our sight, vibrating an
almost infinite number of times in a second, moving hither and yon with
restless energy at all temperatures beyond the absolute zero of
temperature, it is certainly a wonderful feat of human reason and
imagination that we know as much as we do at present. Encouraged by
these results, let us not linger too long in their contemplation but
press forward to the new discoveries which await us in the future.

Then as to electricity, the subtile spirit of the amber, the demon who
reached out his gluttonous arms to draw in the light bodies within his
reach, the fluid which could run through metals with the greatest ease
but could be stopped by a frail piece of glass! Where is it now?
Vanished, thrown on the waste heap of our discarded theories to be
replaced by a far nobler and exalted one of action in the ether of
space.

And so we are brought to consider that other great entity--the ether:
filling all space without limit, we imagine the ether to be the only
means by which two portions of matter distant from each other can have
any mutual action. By its means we imagine every atom in the universe to
be bound to every other atom by the force of gravitation and often by
the force of magnetic and electric action, and we conceive that it alone
conveys the vibratory motion of each atom or molecule out into space to
be ever lost in endless radiation, passing out into infinite space or
absorbed by some other atoms which happen to be in its path. By it all
electromagnetic energy is conveyed from the feeble attraction of the
rubbed amber through the many thousand horse-power conveyed by the
electric wires from Niagara to the mighty rush of energy always flowing
from the Sun in a flood of radiation. Actions feeble and actions mighty
from intermolecular distances through interplanetary and interstellar
distances until we reach the mighty distances which bound the
Universe--all have their being in this wondrous ether.

And yet, however wonderful it may be, its laws are far more simple than
those of matter. Every wave in it, whatever its length or intensity,
proceeds onwards in it according to well known laws, all with the same
speed, unaltered in direction from its source in electrified matter, to
the confines of the Universe unimpaired in energy unless it is disturbed
by the presence of matter. However the waves may cross each other, each
proceeds by itself without interference with the others.

So with regard to gravitation, we have no evidence that the presence of
a third body affects the mutual attraction of two other bodies, or that
the presence of a third quantity of electricity affects the mutual
attraction of two other quantities. The same for magnetism.

For this reason the laws of gravitation and of electric and magnetic
action including radiation are the simplest of all laws when we confine
them to a so-called vacuum, but become more and more complicated when we
treat of them in space containing matter.

Subject the ether to immense electrostatic, magnetic or gravitational
forces and we find absolutely no signs of its breaking down or even of
change of properties. Set it into vibration by means of an intensely hot
body like the sun and it conveys many thousand horse-power for each
square foot of surface as quietly and with apparently unchanged laws as
if it were conveying the energy of a tallow dip.

Again, subject a millimeter of ether to the stress of many thousand, nay
even a million, volts and yet we see no signs of breaking down.

Hence the properties of the ether are of ideal simplicity and lead to
the simplest of natural laws. All forces which act at a distance, always
obey the law of the inverse square of the distance, and we have also the
attraction of any number of parts placed near each other equal to the
arithmetical sum of the attractions when those parts are separated. So
also the simpler law of etherial waves which has been mentioned above.

At the present time, through the labors of Maxwell supplemented by those
of Hertz and others, we have arrived at the great generalization that
all wave disturbances in the ether are electromagnetic in their nature.
We know of little or no etherial disturbance which can be set up by the
motion of matter alone: the matter must be electrified in order to have
sufficient hold on the ether to communicate its motion to the ether. The
Zeeman effect even shows this to be the case where molecules are
concerned and when the period of vibration is immensely great. Indeed
the experiment on the magnetic action of electric convection shows the
same thing. By electrifying a disc in motion it appears as if the disc
holds fast to the ether and drags it with it, thus setting up the
peculiar etherial motion known as magnetism.

Have we not another case of a similar nature when a huge gravitational
mass like that of the earth revolves on its axis? Has not matter a
feeble hold on the ether sufficient to produce the earth's magnetism?

But the experiment of Lodge to detect such an action apparently showed
that it must be very feeble. Might not his experiment have succeeded had
he used an electrical revolving disc?

To detect something dependent on the relative motion of the ether and
matter has been and is the great desire of physicists. But we always
find that, with one possible exception, there is always some
compensating feature which renders our efforts useless. This one
experiment is the aberration of light, but even here Stokes has shown
that it may be explained in either of two ways: first, that the earth
moves through the ether of space without disturbing it, and second, if
it carries the ether with it by a kind of motion called irrotational.
Even here, however, the amount of action probably depends upon
_relative_ motion of the luminous source to the recipient telescope.

So the principle of Döppler depends also on this relative motion and is
independent of the ether.

The result of the experiments of Foucault on the passage of light
through moving water can no longer be interpreted as due to the partial
movement of the ether with the moving water, an inference due to
imperfect theory alone. The experiment of Lodge, who attempted to set
the ether in motion by a rapidly rotating disc, showed no such result.

The experiment of Michelson to detect the etherial wind, although
carried to the extreme of accuracy, also failed to detect any relative
motion of the matter and the ether.

But matter with an electrical charge holds fast to the ether and moves
it in the manner required for magnetic action.

When electrified bodies move together through space or with reference to
each other we can only follow their mutual actions through very slow and
uniform velocities. When they move with velocities comparable with that
of light, equal to it or even beyond it, we calculate their mutual
actions or action on the ether only by the light of our imagination
unguided by experiment. The conclusions of J. J. Thomson, Heaviside and
Hertz are all results of the imagination and they all rest upon
assumptions more or less reasonable but always assumptions. A
mathematical investigation always obeys the law of the conservation of
knowledge: we never get out more from it than we put in. The knowledge
may be changed in form, it may be clearer and more exactly stated, but
the total amount of the knowledge of nature given out by the
investigation is the same as we started with. Hence we can never predict
the result in the case of velocities beyond our reach, and such
calculations as the velocity of the cathode rays from their
electromagnetic action has a great element of uncertainty which we
should do well to remember.

Indeed, when it comes to exact knowledge, the limits are far more
circumscribed.

How is it, then, that we hear physicists and others constantly stating
what will happen beyond these limits? Take velocities, for instance,
such as that of a material body moving with the velocity of light. There
is no known process by which such a velocity can be obtained even though
the body fell from an infinite distance upon the largest aggregation of
matter in the Universe. If we electrify it, as in the cathode rays, its
properties are so changed that the matter properties are completely
masked by the electromagnetic.

It is a common error which young physicists are apt to fall into to
obtain a law, a curve or a mathematical expression for given
experimental limits and then to apply it to points outside those limits.
This is sometimes called extrapolation. Such a process, unless carefully
guarded, ceases to be a reasoning process and becomes one of pure
imagination specially liable to error when the distance is too great.

But it is not my purpose to enter into detail. What I have given
suffices to show how little we know of the profounder questions involved
in our subject.

It is a curious fact that, having minds tending to the infinite, with
imaginations unlimited by time and space, the limits of our exact
knowledge are very small indeed. In time we are limited by a few hundred
or possibly thousand years: indeed the limit in our science is far less
than the smaller of these periods. In space we have exact knowledge
limited to portions of our earth's surface and a mile or so below the
surface, together with what little we can learn from looking through
powerful telescopes into the space beyond. In temperature our knowledge
extends from near the absolute zero to that of the sun but exact
knowledge is far more limited. In pressures we go from the Crookes
vacuum still containing myriads of flying atoms to pressures limited by
the strength of steel but still very minute compared with the pressures
at the center of the earth and sun, where the hardest steel would flow
like the most limpid water. In velocities we are limited to a few miles
per second. In forces to possibly 100 tons to the square inch. In
mechanical rotations to a few hundred times per second.

All the facts which we have considered, the liability to error in
whatever direction we go, the infirmity of our minds in their reasoning
power, the fallibility of witnesses and experimenters, lead the
scientist to be specially sceptical with reference to any statement made
to him or any so-called knowledge which may be brought to his attention.
The facts and theories of our science are so much more certain than
those of history, of the testimony of ordinary people on which the facts
of ordinary history or of legal evidence rest, or of the value of
medicines to which we trust when we are ill, indeed to the whole fabric
of supposed truth by which an ordinary person guides his belief and the
actions of his life, that it may seem ominous and strange if what I have
said of the imperfections of the knowledge of physics is correct. How
shall we regulate our minds with respect to it: there is only one way
that I know of and that is to avoid the discontinuity of the ordinary,
indeed the so-called cultivated legal mind. There is no such thing as
absolute truth and absolute falsehood. The scientific mind should never
recognize the perfect truth or the perfect falsehood of any supposed
theory or observation. It should carefully weigh the chances of truth
and error and grade each in its proper position along the line joining
absolute truth and absolute error.

The ordinary crude mind has only two compartments, one for truth and one
for error; indeed the contents of the two compartments are sadly mixed
in most cases: the ideal scientific mind, however, has an infinite
number. Each theory or law is in its proper compartment indicating the
probability of its truth. As a new fact arrives the scientist changes it
from one compartment to another so as, if possible, to always keep it in
its proper relation to truth and error. Thus the fluid nature of
electricity was once in a compartment near the truth. Faraday's and
Maxwell's researches have now caused us to move it to a compartment
nearly up to that of absolute error.

So the law of gravitation within planetary distances is far toward
absolute truth, but may still need amending before it is advanced
farther in that direction.

The ideal scientific mind, therefore, must always be held in a state of
balance which the slightest new evidence may change in one direction or
another. It is in a constant state of skepticism, knowing full well that
nothing is certain. It is above all an agnostic with respect to all
facts and theories of science as well as to all other so-called beliefs
and theories.

Yet it would be folly to reason from this that we need not guide our
life according to the approach to knowledge that we possess. Nature is
inexorable; it punishes the child who unknowingly steps off a precipice
quite as severely as the grown scientist who steps over, with full
knowledge of all the laws of falling bodies and the chances of their
being correct. Both fall to the bottom and in their fall obey the
gravitational laws of inorganic matter, slightly modified by the
muscular contortions of the falling object but not in any degree changed
by the previous belief of the person. Natural laws there probably are,
rigid and unchanging ones at that. Understand them and they are
beneficent: we can use them for our purposes and make them the slaves of
our desires. Misunderstand them and they are monsters who may grind us
to powder or crush us in the dust. Nothing is asked of us as to our
belief: they act unswervingly and we must understand them or suffer the
consequences. Our only course, then, is to act according to the chances
of our knowing the right laws. If we act correctly, right; if we act
incorrectly, we suffer. If we are ignorant we die. What greater fool,
then, than he who states that belief is of no consequence provided it is
sincere.

An only child, a beloved wife, lies on a bed of illness. The physician
says that the disease is mortal; a minute plant called a microbe has
obtained entrance into the body and is growing at the expense of its
tissues, forming deadly poisons in the blood or destroying some vital
organ. The physician looks on without being able to do anything. Daily
he comes and notes the failing strength of his patient and daily the
patient goes downward until he rests in his grave. But why has the
physician allowed this? Can we doubt that there is a remedy which shall
kill the microbe or neutralize its poison? Why, then, has he not used
it? He is employed to cure but has failed. His bill we cheerfully pay
because he has done his best and given a chance of cure. The answer is
ignorance. The remedy is yet unknown. The physician is waiting for
others to discover it or perhaps is experimenting in a crude and
unscientific manner to find it. Is not the inference correct, then, that
the world has been paying the wrong class of men? Would not this
ignorance have been dispelled had the proper money been used in the past
to dispel it? Such deaths some people consider an act of God. What
blasphemy to attribute to God that which is due to our own and our
ancestors' selfishness in not founding institutions for medical research
in sufficient number and with sufficient means to discover the truth.
Such deaths are murder. Thus the present generation suffers for the sins
of the past and we die because our ancestors dissipated their wealth in
armies and navies, in the foolish pomp and circumstance of society, and
neglected to provide us with a knowledge of natural laws. In this sense
they were the murderers and robbers of future generations of unborn
millions and have made the world a charnel house and place of mourning
where peace and happiness might have been. Only their ignorance of what
they were doing can be their excuse, but this excuse puts them in the
class of boors and savages who act according to selfish desire and not
to reason and to the calls of duty. Let the present generation take
warning that this reproach be not cast on it, for it cannot plead
ignorance in this respect.

This illustration from the department of medicine I have given because
it appeals to all. But all the sciences are linked together and must
advance in concert. The human body is a chemical and physical problem,
and these sciences must advance before we can conquer disease.

But the true lover of physics needs no such spur to his actions. The
cure of disease is a very important object and nothing can be nobler
than a life devoted to its cure.

The aims of the physicist, however, are in part purely intellectual; he
strives to understand the Universe on account of the intellectual
pleasure derived from the pursuit, but he is upheld in it by the
knowledge that the study of nature's secrets is the ordained method by
which the greatest good and happiness shall finally come to the human
race.

Where, then, are the greatest laboratories of research in this city, in
this country, nay, in the world? We see a few miserable structures here
and there occupied by a few starving professors who are nobly striving
to do the best with the feeble means at their disposal. But where in the
world is the institute of pure research in any department of science
with an income of $100,000,000 par year. Where can the discoverer in
pure science earn more than the wages of a day laborer or cook? But
$100,000,000 per year is but the price of an army or a navy designed to
kill other people. Just think of it, that one per cent, of this sum
seems to most people too great to save our children and descendants from
misery and even death!

But the twentieth century is near--may we not hope for better things
before its end? May we not hope to influence the public in this
direction?

Let us go forward, then, with confidence in the dignity of our pursuit.
Let us hold our heads high with a pure conscience while we seek the
truth, and may the American Physical Society do its share now and in
generations yet to come in trying to unravel the great problem of the
constitution and laws of the Universe.




                             HENRY A. ROWLAND.


[Footnote 1: Address delivered to the Physical Society of America by the
President, at its meeting in New York, October 28, 1899.]

*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE HIGHEST AIM OF THE
PHYSICIST ***

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the
United States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away--you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you will have to check the laws of the country where
  you are located before using this eBook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

• You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation.”

• You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
  works.

• You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

• You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you “AS-IS”, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™'s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation's website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without
widespread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
